NASEM Remarks

- First, I'd like to thank the organizers for inviting me to be here and setting the stage for this session. It's really an honor to be here, if only virtually. Given that Andrew has already provided a compelling description of the ingredients for choosing a health inequality metric and the need to consider both methodological and ethical issues when describing inequalities, I'd like to spend my time talking a bit about the need to move beyond simply describing inequalities. I'll give a couple of examples of newer methods as well as illustrating how they can help us to evaluate potential explanations for inequalities.  

- This figure from McGuire and colleagues highlights how one can describe the anatomy of a health inequality. Typically, what we measure and express with data are measures of inequality--differences in health between two social groups. However, this does not account for the potential causes and contributors to that inequality. For example, an observed difference between two racial groups in the quality of health care can consist of some potentially justifiable differences in, say, patient preferences or clinical needs. However, it may also result from systemic biases operating across the health care sector or discrimination in the provision of care, which we would consider unjust. 

- In this way, unpacking the contributors to an overall, observed inequality is essential for making progress in reducing inequalities, as well as for understanding their causes. And we need a better understanding of the causes of inequalities if we are going to intervene to change them. 

- So, I'd argue that we want to move forward from simply describing inequalities to actually explaining them. One way of doing that is to apply methods that can help reveal *why* health inequalities are either changing over time or why they differ between populations. Is it due to differences between groups in proximal risk factors? Demographic factors? Or underlying social conditions? Lastly, decomposing inequalities can help us to integrate the important work of monitoring inequalities with better understanding their causes.

- An example of what such analyses can show us comes from work by Basu and colleagues, who studied racial differences in blood pressure. They used decomposition analysis to assess whether racial differences in BP were due to racial differences in tobacco or alcohol use, sodium intake, or BMI. The key idea here is to 'pull apart' an inequality into potential components. Interestingly, they noted that among those with high blood pressure, blacks generally had more favorable risk factor profiles, which could not explain the difference. This kind of work is helpful for facilitating new investigations to other potential explanatory factors. 

- Another example of how new methods can help is in the area of understanding the health impacts of intersectional identities. As we know, health inequalities are generated by interlocking systems of power, privilege, and oppression, experienced along multiple dimensions of marginalization. However, we typically measure inequalities using single axes of social groups such as race/ethnicity, gender, socioeconomic position, etc. We typically fail to try and understand how these multiple dimensions of inequality intersect and interact to affect health. As we have already heard, data constraints can place severe limits on our ability to reconcile our aspirations for measurement with reality. Small sample sizes and unrepresentative data severely hamper our ability to assess the impact of exposure to multiple identities. But the fact that groups are small does not necessarily mean that they don't carry moral weight or should not be the focus of our attention. 

- In recent years social epidemiologists have been taking advantage of multi-level models typically used to look at individuals clustering within neighborhoods or counties, and are instead using them to look at how individuals cluster within intersectional social strata. This is called multilevel analysis of individual heterogeneity and discriminatory accuracy. I know, it's an absurdly long name, so let's call it MAIHDA for short. The idea here is to create the full spectrum of intersecting social strata of interest, and to use partial pooling techniques to 'borrow strength' across different social strata. Identities that are more rare or less precisely estimated are not mindlessly collapsed or abandoned to asterisks in a table. Instead MAIHDA uses information from similar groups to augment the estimates for these groups. In doing so, we are not forced to abandon measuring inequalities across the full spectrum of social identities. This can help to reveal important inequalities in health without making strong assumptions about additivity.

- Here is an example from Persmark and colleagues looking at differences among social groups in the US in the probability of reporting an opioid use disorder in 2015. MAIHDA allows one to generate estimates (and differences) between the full range of intersecting social strata (here income, race, gender, and age, but there is no limit). So, for example, you can see that the highest probability here was for low-income, white males aged 18-29 years. I've also highlighted a group with much lower risk, medium income Hispanic women aged 30-49. Now, MAIHDA isn't magic. You can see there is greater imprecision among more rare social strata (for example, high income black women aged 18-29). But the key idea here is that we can go beyond more simple descriptions to examine a greater range of intersecting identities. 

- In addition to a deeper view of inequalities, decomposition techniques allow allow us to test theories and reconcile explanations for inequalities. 

- As many of you are aware, life expectancy at birth in the US has not only stagnated, but actually declined in recent years, even before the disaster of the COVID-19 epidemic. The reasons for the decline were not well understood at the time, though there was plenty of speculation.

- And I'd be shocked if you had not heard about one dominant explanation for the decline, and that is the rise in so-called 'deaths of despair'. This was a compelling story told by the economists Anne Case and Angus Deaton, which analyzed mortality data and emphasized the simultaneous rise of drug overdoses, suicides, and alcohol-related deaths, but largely in the white population. 

- This has been a huge story, here featured in two high profile pieces in the New York Times, and a story that has largely centered on the idea that the decline in life expectancy was chiefly due to adverse experiences of low educated, middle aged white men and the disintegration of their economic opportunities in recent years. Case and Deaton also placed a lot of emphasis on deaths of despair as a response to the pain of declining opportunity, and it is worth noting that such an empathetic narrative was mostly absent during prior 'epidemics' that affected nonwhite populations.

- In addition, there was a strong focus on rural areas, and in particular to the idea that rural areas were experiencing the greatest burden of deaths of despair in being left behind in the economy. 

- Measures like life expectancy are valuable in the sense of being easy to understand, but they measure a complex reality of causes, and can lend themselves to simplistic narratives, like 'deaths of despair'. However, one can decompose differences and changes in life expectancy to help understand whether existing narratives are compelling explanations.  We recently used a series of analyses decomposing the decline in life expectancy, but went beyond just population averages and looked at heterogeneity by race/ethnicity, gender, and causes of death. But what we found was hard to reconcile with the 'deaths of despair' narrative. 

- First, a word about the emphasis on rural areas. A longer term look at urban rural mortality gaps shows that, yes, today there is a large gap in mortality between rural areas (here in green) and more urban areas (in purple). However, this gap is not 'new' and it did not emerge as US life expectancy declined. This was a pattern that began in the 1980s, and mostly due to slower declines in cardiovascular disease in more rural areas.

- Moreover, the story about opioids in rural areas also is hard to reconcile with detailed analyses. It's true that in the early 2000s rates were high in the prescription painkiller phase, but since at least the early 2010s and, more importantly, during the decline in US life expectancy, it was more urban areas that had the highest burden. No doubt this is a population-wide and horrible picture, but a 'deaths of despair' narrative helps to ignore the also large and growing impact of slower declines in CVD in rural areas, for which we have proven interventions. 

- Next, lets' talk about race. Here I'm showing you the results of decomposing the decline in US life expectancy from 2014 to 2017, and the contribution of different causes of death by race/ethnicity for men. What we found was that, contrary to the 'despair' narrative, it was actually non-Hispanic black men, not non-Hispanic white men, who had experienced the largest decline in life expectancy during this period, a decline of 0.65 years, nearly double that of whites. Moreover, although opioid overdoses (included here as 'unintentional poisoning') contributed to the decline for all races, increases in homicide accounted for a larger share of the decline among blacks. Yet, homicide, which remains deeply connected to persistent systemic racism in the US, has been mostly ignored in the 'deaths of despair' narrative. In addition, you can see that suicide deaths, also featured prominently in the 'despair' narrative, made little contribution to life expectancy decline in any group. 

- And for women it was also worth noting that non-Hispanic Asian and Pacific Islanders lost nearly as much life expectancy (0.23 years) as did white women, though this was not due to opioid overdoses. These complex and specific changes are hard to tie into a simple narrative about working class white men.

- Finally, it's worth noting that the whole idea of death of despair as a phenomenon has been harder to reconcile with demographic changes in the overdose epidemic. Blacks and American Indian / Alaska Natives are now experiencing the greatest burden, and we won't be able to take action to reduce these lost lives by adhering to outdated and incomplete narratives, even if they contain some grains of truth. 

- Okay, enough negativity. One last thing, and I apologize this is a bit off my topic, but I just saw it yesterday and, since we are talking about the 'double-edged' sword of data, I thought I would share it. It's an economics working paper that assessed the impact of expanding access to confidential data for research. They took advantage of a rollout of Census Research Data Centers across the country and found strong evidence that this not only improved researcher productivity (more and higher-impact publications), but also that this permitted higher quality research designs with results that were more likely to be cited by policy documents. 

- To sum up. We have tools and data to go beyond just describing inequalities, and we should use them to help provide better evidence on why health inequalities exist and how they change over time. They provide opportunities to reconcile empirical evidence with dominant narratives about the causes of health inequalities. Narratives matter because they can synthesize and simplify complex phenomena into a single cause-and-effect story. They identify heroes and villains, emphasize particular causes and populations, set the agenda for interventions, and minimize alternative explanations and solutions. It's our job to integrate evidence and explanation. Thank you.
